# Running BRAPeS on other genomes

BRAPeS can be used for any genome and any organism, as long as the genomic annotations for the V/J/C segments are available. In order to run BRAPeS on genomes besides mm10 or hg38, you will need to create those annotation. Instruction for  
To create new annotations for BRAPeS (see existing genome folders for examples): <br />
Under the Data folder, create a new folder. The name of the folder is the value you will provide the ‘-genome’ parameter. The folder should include only these 4 files: <br />
1.	*.gene.id.mapping.BCR.txt (file name must end with ‘gene.id.mapping.BCR.txt’): A file with no header and two columns: first column is the ID of the V/J/C segment as it appears in the *.BCR.bed file (see below) and second column is the name of the segment (e.g. IGHV6-1, IGKJ4 etc.). This file can be created, for example, from the ensemble download page, filtering only Transcript stable ID and Gene name, and then filtering the file to include only V/J/C segments. No need to include the heavy chain ‘D’ segment annotations.     
2.	*.BCR.bed: Genomic annotations in bed format of the V/J/C segments. Note that BRAPeS will only attempt to reconstruct BCRs from the V and J segments in this file
3.	*.BCR.fa: The fasta file sequence of the V/J/C segments (can be generated from the previous BCR.bed file with the bedtools getfasta commend).
4.	*.conserved.AA.txt: A file with two columns and no header. The first column includes the name of the V/J segment (same name as in the *.gene.id.mapping.BCR.txt file). The second column includes the amino acid sequence of the protein up to the conserved amino acid from which the CDR3 starts. I.e, for V segments it has the amino acid sequence of the protein from the first transcribed position until the conserved Cysteine at position 104 (including the Cysteine). For the J segments it has the amino acid sequence from the conserved W/F amino acid until the end of the transcribed sequence. The file need to include the V and J sequences from all chains (heavy, lambda and kappa).  
One way to generate these files is by copying the protein sequences from the “Protein display” page of the “IMGT repertoire” (see link here [http://www.imgt.org/IMGTrepertoire/Proteins/]), and manually arranging the sequences from all chains to fit the format above.
